---
layout: post
title: Post 2 - What is Bhakti (Love towards God/Ourself)
---

Post two of the 'Convivial couplets of the Cosmic' series


Having faith and love with things around is contingent upon the yielding of expected results from them 
and delivering the same for their turn. So, these transactions of actions and their outcome are the 
deciding factors of the bond between two entities. As an example, the physical world exchanges heat 
energy from sea to land and the chemical world attracts the ions that lower the energy state of it. 
So, how to quantify the amount of work done and its efficacy to adjust the love towards the object. 
That may sound unpopular sentence for quantifying the beautiful and abstract things that govern the world. 
Maybe, people dead inside would get into such non-convivial thoughts. So, Love without any expectations and 
transactions does exists? From my opinion, I would say it exists but that is an one way transaction rather 
than round-way. That love would be called as Bhakti, and the one-way transaction would be called `Sacrifice`
of all the actions and its outcome to the God. So, why sacrifice our actions to God, is considered so worthy? 
and what impact does it make to the surroundings? Many would take the question underwritten, but the answer to 
it conveys the basic working of the system. Sacrifice done at one side connects the gift to other side. 
The energy from sun, bacteria in stomach, starch from rice crop, chillness from water molecules, name it, 
all are giving one part/whole of them to make a part of the reciever. One may draw parallels to First 
Law Theromodynamics too. Ok, Agreed, sacrifice is very important, so how should the sacrifice impact? 
The sacrifice should help to sustain the life cycle that balances the world and it shall be as simple as, 
giving up the idea of getting profit by destroying ample amount of the forest for one's greed. What change does 
that small patch of deforestation could make? hmm... In my opinion, the greedy people justify their greed 
stating how small it is when compared to Mr.Bigger Greedy. But they (even me) all puddle the same.
The power of sacrifice and behoove to follow is one of the core principles of Bhagavad Gita. The person who
is conscious about his/her own sacrifice (KarmaPhalaTyagi = Karma(action) + Phala(its outcome) + Tyagi (Sacrifice)), 
is considered to be the most sanctimonious act, a person would ever do. And Krshna, beautifully puts it up as,

```
श्रेयो हि ज्ञानमभ्यासाज्ज्ञानाद्ध्यानं विशिष्यते |
ध्यानात्कर्मफलत्यागस्त्यागाच्छान्तिरनन्तरम् ||

śhreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj jñānād dhyānaṁ viśhiṣhyate
dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas tyāgāch chhāntir anantaram
```

It is good to follow the religious practices and
ceremonies as prescribed by sacred texts even without knowing the
actual meaning and interpretations. However, it is better to
do the same practices by understanding the meaning. Better than
the knowledge of knowing things is controlling the senses, mind and
consciences (Dhyana). But of all that, sacrificing one's action to
god(greater good) is the best of all existing acts and that is the ONE that gives
a person everlasting blissful peace. 

So, how is Bhakti connected to this ?, what is the result
of lifetime sacrifice?, how it makes one realize the god as looking ourself
to the mirror? what if I don't care about goodness to others?.. 
well, the Chapter 12th of Bhagavad Gita (Bhakti Yoga) answers all the questions
rationally and sensibly. It is one of my favourite chapter and it effortlessly
explain the actual meaning of Bhakti (devotion, fondness, love and gratefulness 
to God/ourself/others).

The chapter 12th starts with a question from Arjuna to Krishna stating the difference
in the way of showing love towards almighty. The two different ways to show one's
devotion would be either `nirguna nirAkara` or `saguna sAkAra` (formless eternal vs divine 
form with plethora of extremenly good qualities). Therefore, found skeptical about it and
wanted to know which one is better and easy to follow. Krshna, explains how they both are 
completely equivalent and the end their paths is the ultimate Almighty. However, having faith,
love and offering devotion to the formless and eternal God, is ofcourse not easy peasy as imagining
him with four hands, clean dress, holy jeweleries, blissful smile, unparalleled beauty, gentle, 
kind and brave face. Krshna mentions to Arjuna how, formful prayer shall be easy than the other, and
faith in `nirguna nirAkara` is challenging and requires lot of austerity, discipline and dedication, that
are not very handy for most of the worldly men. However, assures strongly that, both the devotees, sacrifice all
their results and actions to him and blend along with him.


To be continued...