---
layout: post
title: Lesson 1 - How to stir the stagnant research 
---

Lesson one of the 'Funning Science the Feynman's way' series.

People who engage in research activites or inspiring to do so, often face the dead end, where 
their ideas are exhausted, their hypothesis no longer consistent with empirical and unable to proceed 
with fixing an incessant nagging issue. It always saps out the energy to put in and also make us worry about
staying inert amidst the travel to glory which we dreamed at the start. During his Cornell days, R.Feynamn too
was caught up with this guilt until he realized what went wrong. The story is amazingly portrayed in the chapter,
"The Dignified Professor" from "Surely you're joking, Mr.Feynman", and an excerpt from that chapter,

<i>
It was absurd. The other offers had made me feel worse, up to a point. They were 
expecting me to accomplish something. But this offer was so ridiculous, so impossible 
for me ever to live up to, so ridiculously out of proportion. The other ones were just 
mistakes; this was an absurdity! I laughed at it while I was shaving, thinking about it. 
And then I thought to myself, "You know, what they think of you is so fantastic, 
it's impossible to live up to it. You have no responsibility to live up to it!" 
It was a brilliant idea: You have no responsibility to live up to what other people 
think you ought to accomplish. I have no responsibility to be like they expect me to be. 
It's their mistake, not my failing.Then I had another thought: Physics disgusts me a little bit now, but I used to 
enjoy doing physics. Why did I enjoy it? I used to play with it. I used to do whatever I felt 
like doing ­­ it didn't have to do with whether it was important for the development of 
nuclear physics, but whether it was interesting and amusing for me to play with. When I 
was in high school, I'd see water running out of a faucet growing narrower, and wonder if 
I could figure out what determines that curve. I found it was rather easy to do. I didn't 
have to do it; it wasn't important for the future of science; somebody else had already 
done it. That didn't make any difference: I'd invent things and play with things for my 
own entertainment. So I got this new attitude. Now that I am burned out and I'll never accomplish 
anything, I've got this nice position at the university teaching classes which I rather 
enjoy, and just like I read the Arabian Nights for pleasure, I'm going to play with physics, 
whenever I want to, without worrying about any importance whatsoever. 
Within a week I was in the cafeteria and some guy, fooling around, throws a plate 
in the air. As the plate went up in the air I saw it wobble, and I noticed the red medallion 
of Cornell on the plate going around. It was pretty obvious to me that the medallion went
around faster than the wobbling. I had nothing to do, so I start to figure out the motion of the 
rotating plate. I discover that when the angle is very slight, the medallion rotates twice as fast as the 
wobble rate ­­ two to one. It came out of a complicated equation! Then I thought, "Is 
there some way I can see in a more fundamental way, by looking at the forces or the 
dynamics, why it's two to one?" 
I don't remember how I did it, but I ultimately worked out what the motion of the 
mass particles is, and how all the accelerations balance to make it come out two to one. 
I still remember going to Hans Bethe and saying, "Hey, Hans! I noticed 
something interesting. Here the plate goes around so, and the reason it's two to one is. . ." 
and I showed him the accelerations. 
He says, "Feynman, that's pretty interesting, but what's the importance of it? Why 
are you doing it?" 
"Hah!" I say. "There's no importance whatsoever. I'm just doing it for the fun of 
it." His reaction didn't discourage me; I had made up my mind I was going to enjoy 
physics and do whatever I liked. 
I went on to work out equations of wobbles. Then I thought about how electron 
orbits start to move in relativity. Then there's the Dirac Equation in electrodynamics. And 
then quantum electrodynamics. And before I knew it (it was a very short time) I was 
"playing" ­­ working, really ­­ with the same old problem that I loved so much, that I had 
stopped working on when I went to Los Alamos: my thesis­type problems; all those old­ 
fashioned, wonderful things. 
It was effortless. It was easy to play with these things. It was like uncorking a 
bottle: Everything flowed out effortlessly. I almost tried to resist it! There was no 
importance to what I was doing, but ultimately there was. The diagrams and the whole 
business that I got the Nobel Prize for came from that piddling around with the wobbling 
plate. 
</i>

Yes you're right!, he managed to turn his bad days to be the reason for his Nobel Prize.. 
That indeed gives head chills!! So the lesson we learnt is, just enjoy the problem and with little
respite and different perspective, you're gonna shoot up with way more beyond than solving that 
petty problem (which sounded like). 

**Happy Researching!! Happy Exploring!!**