---
layout: post
title: Post 1 - Permanent vs Temporary (Nitya vs ANitya)
---

Post one of the 'Convivial couplets of the Cosmic' series

Ahh less catchy, insipid moral lecture, keeps humdruming the platant statements... Before actually even starting to
read the post, it clearly going to be the cliche phrases, "Do your duty", "Don't get disheartened", "You are born to succeed",
"Despair is the conclusion of fools" etc.. Well, but I am not going to. 

When I read Bhagavad Gita - Chapter 2, I was completely mesmarized by its simple articulation explaining, 
what is the action and duty. It completely changed the entire perspective of how/what to perform/imply from the action/its outcome.
Lately, I read Joseph Murphy's famous work "Power of Sub-conscious mind", where he expalins how repeated imagination of 
the desired outcome shall summon upon the nature to bring that to reality. Though it is a good book, I felt a piece missing in that, 
the piece somewhere related to being humana, abiding nature and being social. I felt, one reading it and practicing is about to be a person
with crippling anxiety and facepalm after petty unfavourable outcomes. For example by book's way, to get into a good grad school, all I need to 
do is imagine that I have got admission in a good grad school, I got scholarship, I got a job... each day before and after sleep. Yes, this 
going to make undeniably a lot of improvements, but won't that fixating thought shall also bring "Sadness", when things don't turn up well?
Aren't you going to get more disheartened, when you can't make it. The LIFE has to be dealt with "Joy and Sorrow" and you can't step aside
one and stay in the other forever. But the bluntless Bhagavad Gita, has its own awesome way of performing actions which is considered to 
be the best and unparallel way to perform one's action. I would like to share some of the verses of Chapter 2, which would pierce your heart and 
wisdom barrel like a hot knife through the butter.


The chapter starts with portraying Atma (one's soul) and how it is coalsced with nature and permanent. By Hindu Mythology, the soul is undestroyable and 
unpersiahable, which goes into perishable body and perceives the surrounding (prakriti) from the very birth. So, the mosquito nagging you below the table,
your sweet mom, your cute pet, probiotic bacteria in your stomach... all are going to / were reborn relating/unrelating with you millions of times 
in different means of creatures. Just realizing this would shiver the body. The silver spoon/street sleeper, staying hundred years/having heart problem 
at the age of 10, is all decided by your karma (the outcome of one's action). Now this may sound less rationale and uncanny, but you cannot deny it. 
Maybe it is abstruse. But think about how incapable and suppressed we are by the gigantic powers around us. So being said that, the Vedas, Upanishads, 
Bhagavad Gita, etc. all are consistent with the concept of Atma. The chapter starts with, Arjuna who was about to lead the war against his own cousins,
teachers and relatives, felt disheartened about how he would attack his loved ones. Seeing him, Lord Krishna came to him and told about Atma, and how 
futile is worrying about life (which their current life is approximately 1/10^3 of his past lives). The permanent and unpersihable of soul is beautifully
explained as,

    `न त्वेवाहं जातु नासं न त्वं नेमे जनाधिपा |
     न चैव न भविष्याम: सर्वे वयमत: परम् || 12|| `

    `na tvevāhaṁ jātu nāsaṁ na tvaṁ neme janādhipāḥ
     na chaiva na bhaviṣhyāmaḥ sarve vayamataḥ param`

    Meaning: Never was there a time when I did not exist, 
    nor you, nor all these kings; nor in the future shall 
    any of us cease to be. 

That is so hard to even believe.. the campus placement you were sweating about, the food you're thinking worth to eat in lifetime, etc. 
all are something you worry about in your transient thousandth/millionth life you're leading. If it is true then how worthless lives and desires
we keep rolling in everyday. So can we all just sleep the whole lifetime up and pass away, again reborn, continue? What to worry about this negligibly
contributing actions and duties?